Tonight, on
The Secret Life of the Brain...
( speaking unintelligibly )
WOMAN:
At the age where
you're expecting
kids to say "Mom or Dad,"
he would just
be making sounds.
The Child's Brain.
Ooh... bubbles.
And the miracle of language.
Hello? It's me, Rachel.
How does a child learn to talk?
WOMAN:
How about this one?
And to read?
( growling "r" sound )
What happens
if something goes wrong?
BOY:
I had this... this thing
in my brain
that's called dyslexia.
Tonight, the brain's
dynamic first years.
[Captioning sponsored
by WNET]
Major funding for
The Secret Life of the Brain
is provided by
the National Science Foundation
America's investment
in the future.
Funding is also provided by...
At Pfizer, we're spending
nearly $5 billion
looking for the cures
of the future.
We have 12,000 scientists
and health experts
who firmly believe the only
thing incurable is our passion.
The Medtronic Foundation,
on behalf of Medtronic.
Providing lifelong solutions
for people with chronic disease.
The Park Foundation--
dedicated to education
and quality television.
The Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions
to your PBS station from:
NARRATOR:
The brain is wider than the sky,
for put them side by side,
The one the other will contain
with ease, and you beside.
The brain is deeper
than the sea,
For hold them, blue to blue,
The one the other will absorb,
as sponges, buckets do.
The brain is just
the weight of God,
For heft them, pound for pound,
And they will differ,
if they do,
As syllable from sound.
A child's brain--
a swirling profusion of billions
and billions of neurons,
reaching out
to billions more neurons
to form trillions of connections
pulsing with electric
and chemical energy.
WOMAN:
Exuberant connectivity.
The cells
literally are going wild
making all these connections,
discovering each other,
forming the basis of what
we call something learned.
Learning is about connection.
And connectivity.
And exuberance.
WOMAN:
You start with a block of
marble, like a sculptor would--
and there's
a lot of marble there.
A young child has hundreds
of trillions of connections
in the brain, twice as many
connections as the adult.
And then comes along
the sculptor,
who takes away bits
of the marble to reveal a form.
Experience is the sculptor;
experience determines
which of those connections
to take away and which to leave.
That's what learning is:
it's changing the weights
of the connections in the brain,
depending on experience.
NARRATOR:
The child's brain is plastic,
a magnificent,
flexible engine for learning.
A child learns to crawl,
then walk, run and explore.
A child learns to reason,
to pay attention, and remember.
A child learns to make friends.
But nowhere
is learning more dramatic
than in the way a child
learns to master language,
the great leap
that the brain makes
that is nothing short
of a miracle.
Hello? It's me, Rachel.
( speaking softly
and unintelligibly )
Oh, yeah.
Oh, definitely then, bye.
Bye.
WOMAN:
So, has she started talking yet?
She talks, but we
don't understand her.
Okay.
( all laughing )
She says words, but there...
there is no meaning.
Okay.
WOMAN:
She probably
has about five words
that we can clearly understand.
She says "kitty,"
she says "Elmo,"
she says "Daddy,"
she says "get,"
she says "woof,"
for doggy.
Does she have
any other words, Nate?
Um, I think...
"Nate."
Oh, that's right,
she says "day," for "Nate,"
because that's him,
that's the big guy over here.
Ooh... bubbles.
( whispering ):
Want to talk?
Da, da, da, da.
( chuckling )
Look at this!
Telephone.
Hello, who's there?
( baby squeals )
Da, da, da?
Ooh, I got the queen!
WOMAN:
A queen?
Mm-hmm.
WOMAN:
Language development represents
one of these profound
mysterious changes.
Thanks.
You're welcome, honey.
Thanks!
( laughing )
You bring a baby home
from the hospital,
a wrinkly newborn
at seven pounds,
and within three years,
that child can talk in sentences
and speak to anyone
and deceive you with their words
and inspire you
with their words,
and so it's,
"How does this come about?"
BOY:
Wow.
GIRL:
Missed me.
Michael, wait, stay there,
I want to do that, too.
No, I'm going to do it
with my nanas, okay?
Oh, yeah, I want
to get bananas,
too, that's...
That would be funny.
No... ( unintelligible )
I know, that's what
I'm going to try to do...
NARRATOR:
Nearly all children
learn to speak as easily
as a bird learns to sing.
( boy speaking excitedly,
unintelligibly )
NARRATOR:
Michael Blankenship
is an exception.
My cart's...
NARRATOR:
At five years old,
by the time most children
have mastered grammar,
Michael still struggles
to make himself understood,
and no one yet understands why.
Did that guy...?
Did you hear that?
Yeah, that guy
just hit me, went,
( imitating
character shouting )
WOMAN:
When Michael was at the age
where you're expecting
kids to say "Mom" or "Dad"
or some type of a noise,
he did not offer
to make any type of a sound,
didn't even try.
All the other nieces
and nephews were
and we were noticing
that Michael wasn't.
Get her, get her,
get her...
MOTHER:
I think Michael
was probably close
to two and a half to three
years old before he started
saying the normal words
that most kids start with.
And even at that point, when he
would try to say "Mom" or "Dad,"
it was "Ma" and "Da."
He still couldn't
say the whole word.
MICHAEL:
A pea!
SISTER:
Look, a peach.
I don't like peachy.
Michael, it's peach.
Peach!
( speaking unintelligibly )
( video game whistling )
Nice try.
( father laughing )
Ow!
He didn't have much
of a vocabulary
until... I would say
he was probably
three and a half
years old.
Yeah.
And then he started
picking up
on different words
and we knew what he meant,
because he lived with us,
but anybody
outside family,
did not know
what he was saying.
WOMAN:
What does it look like, hmm?
Do I look really big
or really small?
Uh-huh.
Small?
NARRATOR:
Michael's difficulties
with words
have nothing to do
with his intelligence.
Good, okay, if you
turn them around
see what happens.
NARRATOR:
In her laboratory
at the University of Oregon,
neuroscientist Helen Neville
is trying to understand
what has gone wrong.
Orange tennis ball.
Yeah, I like
that one a lot, too.
( woman's voice over speaker ):
I like to sandwiches
eat for lunch.
NARRATOR:
While Michael is distracted
by a puppet show,
electrodes in the bonnet
he wears
pick up electrical pulses
generated by his brain
as he listens to sentences
laced with grammatical errors.
WOMAN ( over speaker ):
Big kids like to Coke
drink from a can.
We're eavesdropping
on communication
and at the language system
of the brain itself.
WOMAN ( over speaker ):
Like to make cookies
with chocolate chips.
NARRATOR:
Neville is studying
the connections
between speaking, listening,
and understanding,
closely linked parts of the
brain's complex language system.
NEVILLE:
It's very important to take
a language-impaired child
and evaluate what's deficient
and what isn't.
WOMAN ( over speaker ):
The backyard...
Language depends
on so many different systems
and structures in the brain,
that a problem
within any one of those systems
could lead
to a final common problem,
that is, of language impairment.
Great!
All of them down!
Let's take a look
at what we've got.
Jump.
Jumped... oh, wait,
I want to hear
"jumped."
Jumped.
Perfect, perfect.
NARRATOR:
While scientists
are still searching
to understand why the brain
sometimes fails to process
language successfully...
Card.
Crawled.
NARRATOR:
with practice, children
like Michael can improve.
( listening to exercises
over headphones )
WOMAN:
Michael still has difficulty
producing sounds accurately.
Wick.
Licked.
Yeah, that's close.
For example the "L" sound,
he doesn't have the "L" sound.
He will work later
on sounds like the "R's,"
and the "V" sounds
and the "T-H" sounds.
He's improved dramatically.
So many of the early
developing sounds
that he didn't have when he was
initially seen are now there.
FATHER:
Nut.
MICHAEL:
Very good.
Eight.
Make sure you
put that "T" on.
Pizza.
They got cheese...
Hot.
Hot, okay...
NARRATOR:
Through repetition and practice,
Michael is becoming fluent
in the spoken language
that is his birthright
as a human being.
Rat.
Okay, good job...
NARRATOR:
He is shaping his own brain,
changing it
with every syllable and sound.
Gate.
Gate, good job.
MOTHER:
He's excited
to expand his vocabulary
and to learn how to say words.
When you pet a dog, pat.
Pat.
Pat the dog.
( laughing )
Sometimes you can't
shut him up,
but, uh, he's...
he's coming along.
Every week there's
a difference
in his speech.
It's getting better
and better.
NEVILLE:
The human brain
is highly adaptable,
and the young human brain
shows even a greater ability
to change than older brains.
By studying Michael
and others like him
we're getting
a very basic understanding
of how a system of neurons
in the brain
could give rise
to human language,
this marvelous skill which is
without limits, without limits.
We can generate new sentences
that you've never heard before,
ad infinitum,
and you can understand them,
even though you've
never heard them before.
So how is that possible?
ELECTRONIC VOICE:
Sheep, sheep, sheep, sheep...
NARRATOR:
There are thousands
of human languages,
and babies are born with the
capacity to learn any of them.
( electronic voice
repeating "sheep" )
They begin by listening--
a baby sorts through
a babble of sounds
with more keen an ear
than a conductor rehearsing
a symphony orchestra.
NARRATOR:
At the University of Washington,
neuroscientist Pat Kuhl
has been studying
the building blocks
of language--
the vowels and consonants
that make up words.
KUHL:
In this particular experiment,
we're looking
at how children respond to the
sounds of their native language
and the sounds
of a foreign language.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Shi... shi...
KUHL:
We're recording what's happening
to the brain
as the baby's listening
to the Chinese Mandarin "shi..."
COMPUTER VOICE:
Shi... shi... shi...
KUHL:
and then what happens
to the brain
when that sound is changed
to this Chinese Mandarin
"t-chi" sound.
COMPUTER VOICE:
T-chi... t-chi... t-chi...
Of course, to us they sound
like "she, she,"
they sound like the same thing.
But we're interested
in whether or not the baby's
brain records a change
when a physical change
in the sounds is made.
COMPUTER VOICE:
T-chi... t-chi...
KUHL:
As Americans, we cannot hear
the distinction.
It really sounds like
the same category-- S-H.
COMPUTER VOICE:
T-chi... t-chi...
To the Chinese, they say,
"No, no-- there's
a very clear shift."
COMPUTER VOICE:
T-chi... t-chi...
And the interesting thing that
the studies have demonstrated
is that at birth and for
a short period thereafter,
babies have this
incredibly exquisite ability
to hear differences
between all the sounds
used in the world's languages.
The babies are outperforming us.
I like to refer to them
as "citizens of the world"
in the beginning.
And of course, we're
not citizens of the world.
We're quite
culture-bound listeners.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Shi... shi...
NARRATOR:
At seven months, babies are
still citizens of the world,
but by the time they reach
11 months,
they are citizens
of a single country,
specialists in one language.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Shi... shi...
NARRATOR:
By 11 months, the babies are
behaving like their parents.
This baby is not responding
to the change
between "shi" and "t-chi".
It's now "she, she" to the baby
just like it is for us
as adults.
The news is that by 11 months,
we are not perceiving reality.
We're not responding
to the real differences
that exist in the sounds.
We're listening
through this filter
that was developed early in life
as we mapped the sounds of
our language during listening.
Bah.
KUHL:
The baby starts out with a keen
ability to hear distinctions.
Ready?
Should we do
it again?
KUHL:
The feat of development is
to actually form categories
and ignore some
of those distinctions...
WOMAN:
There goes
the train.
KUHL:
The ones that are great
for a foreign language
but not for the language
you're trying to master.
Three!
Three?!
KUHL:
And that ability has produced
a brain
that's a very,
very different one
than we saw
just four months earlier.
NARRATOR:
As a child grows into an adult,
the brain becomes
more and more complex,
an intricate modular organ of
many highly specialized parts.
In nearly all adults,
language finds its home
in the left cerebral hemisphere.
Vocabulary, grammar,
comprehension
are different language systems
with their own neural circuitry.
NEVILLE:
We have very little
understanding about how
this highly differentiated
mosaic comes about.
How did it get to be that way?
That's what we want to know.
Is it there at birth?
Does it develop over time?
What's driving the development?
Is it based in our genes?
Or does it depend on experience?
What we're going
to be doing today
is measuring
the brain's response
to words that she understands
from the list
that you filled out
and we'll be recording
over the different areas
of the brain, so we'll see
where there's
more activity
and where
that happens
in the brain.
NARRATOR:
How specialized is
a baby's brain?
What part of the brain does
a baby use to understand words?
COMPUTER VOICE:
Pint.
Unit.
Dog.
NARRATOR:
In a series of experiments
at the University of California,
San Diego,
developmental psychologist
Debbie Mills has found
that 13-month-old babies listen
and understand
with both cerebral hemispheres.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Banana.
Ball.
Duck.
But by 20 months,
at a time when babies
have been learning
as many as a dozen words a day,
increasing the size of their
vocabulary dramatically,
the language center of the brain
has begun to shift
to the left hemisphere.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Milk.
WOMAN:
¿Dónde están los pies?
iMuy bien!
¿Dónde está la mano?
NARRATOR:
What is driving
this specialization of language?
Is it an inevitable
biological process,
a product of the child's
maturing brain?
¿Dónde está el agua?
iMuy bien!
NARRATOR:
Or is it a result
of a child's increasing
experience with words?
Where's the diaper?
Good job!
NARRATOR:
Children who understand
more than one language
are helping scientists answer
these questions.
iMuy bien!
¿Dónde está la leche?
( gasps )
Leche.
( laughing ):
Sí, mamá también tiene leche.
NARRATOR:
Arielle Algaze is almost two.
She's still nursing.
( women laughing )
NARRATOR:
Because her parents speak
English and Spanish,
she understands both languages.
¿Dónde está el gato?
iMuy bien!
NARRATOR:
But she knows many more Spanish
words than English ones,
which makes Arielle a perfect
subject for Mills' experiment.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Baby.
Jugo.
Bubble.
NARRATOR:
If age alone is driving
brain specialization,
then by two,
both English and Spanish
should have begun to shift
into Arielle's left hemisphere.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Plantain.
NARRATOR:
But if increasing vocabulary
size is driving specialization,
then Arielle's left hemisphere
will respond to Spanish words,
while English will provoke
a response
everywhere in her brain.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Borde.
Compute.
Agua.
NARRATOR:
In fact, Mills and her
research team have found
that in children like Arielle,
the brain has begun
to specialize
in response to Spanish--
the language they know best.
COMPUTER VOICE:
Cookie.
NARRATOR:
English words provoke
a more diffuse response
all across the brain.
MILLS:
That really suggests that it is
experience with language
that's driving
these specializations.
It can't be maturation
because it's in the same child
and in the same brain.
The startling,
astonishing revelation
that has occurred
over the past few years
is that experience
is a major player
in driving the development
and differentiation
of the brain.
NARRATOR:
If language takes its place
in the left hemisphere,
what happens when the left
hemisphere is compromised
by injury or disease?
For most of her life,
eight-year-old Katie Warrick has
suffered seizures so devastating
that today she can no longer
even talk.
After agonizing discussions
with doctors
at Johns Hopkins Hospital
in Baltimore,
her parents have made up
their minds.
Katie's doctors
have advised them
that their little girl has
just one hope of living
like other children...
Kiss Daddy.
( kisses )
We'll see you.
NARRATOR:
strike at the seizures
by eliminating the place in
the brain where they are found--
the left hemisphere.
Katie is going to have
nearly half her brain
surgically removed.
WOMAN:
When they tell you that,
all's you hear is the risk.
Four years ago, we said,
"I'm sorry, but we're not
even going to consider that.
"That's not even
an option for us.
"We're going to exhaust
all our possibilities
with drugs
before we can even think
about that."
Well, four years later,
we did.
There is no more drugs
out there for her.
She's been on them all.
NARRATOR:
The operation will take
six hours.
If it succeeds,
her seizures will stop,
and Katie might even
learn to talk again.
KATIE'S MOM:
I just have to keep
telling myself
"The outcome is going
to be worth it.
The outcome is going
to be worth it."
( screeches )
( laughing )
MAN:
Stay out
of the deep end.
NARRATOR:
It was seven years ago
that 14-year-old Michael Rehbein
had the left part
of his brain removed.
Watch this, Mom.
Ready? One more time.
NARRATOR:
Every two years, he joins other
children like him for a reunion.
They are a small band--
children who have struggled back
from an operation that has cured
their seizures,
but robbed them
of part of their brain,
leaving them with
half their body paralyzed.
( water splashes )
Whoa!
MAN:
Nice flip!
He had to learn to walk again,
learned how to talk again.
With feet first!
You know, it was...
It was just like being
an infant again, too.
He had to start
from scratch.
He knew his ABCs and he could
count backwards from ten.
He had to learn all that
all over again.
So it was pretty hard.
It was an uphill battle.
Yeah.
It still is today.
There's things today
that he has to learn
every day of his life.
You doing okay?
Yeah.
I'll tell you
what we're going
to start with doing.
I'm going to say
two words.
I want you to
listen to them
really closely
and tell me whether
they're the same word
or whether they're
different words.
Are you ready?
Pat, bat.
Different.
Fit, feet.
NARRATOR:
At Johns Hopkins Hospital,
neuroscientist Dana Boatman has
been testing Michael Rehbein
ever since his left hemisphere
was removed, part of her study
of how children learn to
understand spoken language.
Same.
BOATMAN:
One of the surprising findings
of our study
is that when we test Michael's
abilities to understand speech
independent of his ability
to speak,
he performs within normal limits
for his age.
...tick.
Different.
The right hemisphere seems to do
every bit as good a job
at understanding spoken speech
as the left hemisphere.
And it suggests to us
that those abilities are
not just in the left hemisphere,
but that they're represented in
both hemispheres of the brain.
BOATMAN:
Ready to wear
some headphones?
Are you going to stay
awake for this?
I thought you got
a nap today.
Oh, I did.
Oh, so you need
another one?
( chuckles )
BOATMAN:
It seems that there is
much more plasticity there
than we had originally
anticipated.
INTERVIEWER:
How do you account
for the fact
that you can do
all these things?
Try my best.
Persistence.
Persistence is the key.
Determination.
You do seem
like a really
hard worker.
I watched you
doing those
tests.
Are those tough?
A little bit.
Some easy,
some hard.
INTERVIEWER:
What's the
hard part?
Is it
remembering?
No-- speak.
Speech is the most
difficult thing
for a left-hemisphere patient
to overcome,
'cause you lose your
speech center on that side.
Memory's good.
He can remember
anything.
I love math.
( chuckles )
INTERVIEWER:
But speaking?
Hard--
a little bit.
NARRATOR:
Every Saturday
all through the summer,
Michael races mini-stock cars
at the Tri-County Speedway
near his home
in upstate New York.
INTERVIEWER:
You flipped over once,
didn't you?
MICHAEL'S MOM:
More than once.
How many times
did you go over?
Twice.
My... got scared
half to death.
( laughing )
I closed my eyes.
INTERVIEWER:
You must've closed
your eyes, too.
Oh, my heart was
in my throat.
INTERVIEWER:
We saw you holding your own
and then we saw
the car break down.
What happened?
MICHAEL:
That spark plug.
KEITH:
Broke a spark plug.
That's all it was.
CRYSTAL:
And Daddy didn't have one
in his pocket.
INTERVIEWER:
How did that feel?
MICHAEL:
Really sad.
You hate it
when the little things
let you down,
don't you, bud?
Mm-hmm.
INTERVIEWER:
What was Michael like
before the surgery?
Do you remember?
Climb a tree.
Yep, very
athletic.
You were at Tastee-Freez
one night, remember?
Mm-hmm.
And you looked around,
couldn't find Mike.
He was up
on the pole.
( laughs )
CRYSTAL:
And then the seizures hit.
NARRATOR:
When local doctors
could not tell the Rehbeins
what was wrong,
they took Michael to Johns
Hopkins Hospital.
KEITH:
I think that they knew what it
was before we ever got there...
CRYSTAL:
Yeah, just by
looking at him.
KEITH:
Just from
the descriptions.
And then they just
kind of dropped it on us.
It took a lot of decision,
a lot of soul-searching
to do it.
Yep.
When... a day when
he had a good day
when he might have 50
or 60 or 70 seizures
you... you kind of
had to sit there and go,
"Do we really want
to do this to him?"
You know, "Is it something
that's going to benefit him?"
CRYSTAL:
Then the next day
was 300.
And then the next day he may
have 300, 400 seizures, and then
it was like, no, there's no
doubt in your mind today.
Finally, you know,
it got to the point
where it got so bad that...
TOGETHER:
We had to do something.
And then on the day
we sent him into surgery
he didn't have
any seizures that day.
BOATMAN:
I began testing Michael
as early as the first week
after he had surgery.
And despite the fact that he
was largely mute at that time
he was showing an intact ability
to... to hear and
to process spoken speech.
That suggests to us that these
children may have the abilities
already in place in the right
hemisphere to acquire language
and they can then build on those
abilities and develop language.
By six months after surgery
Michael's speech-understanding
abilities
were back to what they were
before surgery.
At that point, he was producing
one-, two-word utterances
spontaneously.
Very slowly, the ability
to produce words
comes back over the course
of a couple of years.
( dog barking )
The extent to which they're able
to produce fluent speech
seems to vary
from child to child.
WOMAN:
I got Michael
in my class about...
I think it was seven months
after the operation
and he was not using
full sentences.
He was only speaking
in two- or three-word phrases
and doing lots of gesturing.
We worked hard trying
to get Michael
to increase his vocabulary;
to speak sentences.
I remember
the first full sentence
that he... that he told me;
that he gave us.
He said to me,
"I love you with all my heart."
BOATMAN:
Michael.
MICHAEL ( over intercom ):
Yeah.
Are you awake?
Are you going to be taking
a nap in there?
No.
Good.
( staff laughs )
NARRATOR:
By scanning the brains
of children like Michael
who have lost
their left hemispheres,
Dana Boatman is trying to learn
how the brain's language systems
have been reorganized.
BOATMAN:
Are you ready to start working?
MICHAEL ( over intercom ):
Yeah.
You'll hear
those sounds now.
I want you to decide
if they're the same
or different--
if they're the same,
you're going to press
the button.
Do you remember that part?
MICHAEL:
Yeah.
( machine plays
two dissimilar tones )
( scanner beeping )
( machine plays
two similar tones )
NARRATOR:
We know that
the right hemisphere
is supporting language recovery.
We're now starting
to try and identify
the exact areas
in the right hemisphere
that are being recruited.
( scanner beeping )
Is it the same area
that the child used
in the left hemisphere?
( machine plays
two similar tones )
Or is it a different area?
( machine plays
two dissimilar tones )
Do they need more of the right
hemisphere to support language
than they may have
needed previously
in the left hemisphere?
NARRATOR:
Boatman's preliminary findings
show that areas
in the right hemisphere
that take on the job
of understanding language
correspond to the language areas
in the left hemisphere.
But the right hemisphere
is not as efficient as the left.
Michael needs more
of his right hemisphere
to understand the spoken word
than a child
with both hemispheres.
BOATMAN:
We have children as old now
as 16 years of age
who have had left
hemispherectomies
who are able to recover
the ability to understand
spoken speech
every bit as well as they did
before surgery
and... as do normal children.
So this suggests that
we need to revise our notion
of an age limit on when
these surgeries can be done
and take into consideration
the fact that different
language functions
may be affected differently
by age.
( crash )
KEITH:
All right.
There you are.
That's the shot.
Right in there.
KEITH:
He's still the same boy inside
that he was before the surgery.
KEITH:
Might sail.
( exasperated groan )
KEITH:
He didn't lose his drive
or his determination.
He'll just keep trying
and trying and trying.
Ooh.
You get it?
Hit it!
( both groan )
I was going to say...
KEITH:
We've learned to rely
on each other a great deal.
We're a very
close family,
aren't we, bud?
Yeah.
In a way, this kind of stole
some of his childhood.
Yes.
And it stole it from us, too,
because you know,
the years that...
when he's in first,
second grade
those are pretty precious.
I mean, they're still
precious years that we had
but they were pretty
frustrating, too.
Yeah.
But we couldn't ask
for a nicer boy now.
Mmm.
( children laughing )
JANE:
There's the laugh.
( all laughing )
NARRATOR:
In the plasticity
of the child's brain
there is continual reason
for hope.
You want more push?
( Katie grunts )
NARRATOR:
Six months after her
left hemisphere was removed
Katie Warrick is no longer
suffering relentless firestorms
in her brain.
While the years of seizures
have left their mark
Katie's right hemisphere
is adapting
to its new responsibilities.
JANE:
It's just a joy to hear her
excited about something.
She wakes up happy.
She's really in tune
to what's going on around her.
She's a whole lot more aware.
( exclaims )
You got to reach it.
Yay!
It's... it's like
an awakening.
I... I told Robert it's like
having a different child.
We have to learn to get
to know her all over again.
( giggling )
( groans humorously )
NARRATOR:
Katie's language
is beginning to come back.
Her understanding has improved,
and she is showing signs
of talking.
Uh-oh.
Oh, you don't want
that ball.
( grunts purposefully )
You want this ball.
( garbled ):
Yeah.
JANE:
There's sounds and noises
starting to come out of her...
( grunts purposefully )
In her own little way,
in her own
little language
just like a baby does,
you know--
how they... when they
first start to say words,
they're not very clear,
but you kind of get the message
of what they want.
Eyes.
Ears.
Nose. Yay!
FATHER:
Every couple of weeks
or something
we'll see something different.
Feel like you're so close,
you know.
It's just like tomorrow,
she's going
to come up and say,
"Hi, Mom and Dad,
what's for breakfast?"
It's just that close.
You can just see her...
see her forming the words
and trying
to get them out.
But I imagine it's
a little tougher,
you know,
with the damage
and stuff, so...
But we're looking
forward to it.
Yeah.
WOMAN:
"There was once a prince who
wanted to marry a princess.
"But she had to be
a real princess.
"The prince looked and looked,
and he met many princesses.
"But the prince sent
all of them away.
One day, there
was a big storm..."
NARRATOR:
For most of us
speaking is as natural
and inevitable as walking.
TEACHER:
"'Come in,' said the king.
'Come in,' said the queen."
NARRATOR:
Reading is a high wire
balancing act,
a performance by the brain
that demands
the sophisticated coordination
of many of its parts.
TEACHER:
"There's a lump in my bed."
WOMAN:
Reading never just happens.
Reading is an example
of one of the most complex
everyday human cognitive
performances we have.
"And she went off
to make the bed."
If we're novice, or young,
it happens in a certain way
in the brain.
If we're older, automatic
processes are being used
in other parts of the brain.
If we're... we're reading
Chinese characters,
one aspect of our brain
is being used.
If we're reading an alphabet,
another aspect of our brain
is being used.
WOLF:
"Once, long ago,
in a dark, lonely place,
"where the light of the sun
was never to be seen,
"there lived an elfin creature
"with hollow cheeks
and waxen complexion.
"Across the valley,
in a place where the sun
"played on every leaf and flower
"lived a maiden with cheeks
like rose petals,
and hair like golden silk."
Well... think syntax,
think vocabulary,
think words that
you never, ever hear
in oral discourse
around the table.
The child has to learn
to put all these hundreds
of concepts together to read.
"Tab is a cat."
BOY:
Correct.
"Tab has a pal."
"Tab is..."
NARRATOR:
For some children,
reading comes easily.
"Mack is a bad pal."
BOY:
"P... Pat has the ham."
"Pat ha... hi..."
( whispering ):
Check.
"Ha... had the pan."
NARRATOR:
For others, it is a struggle
that has nothing to do with
their powers to think or reason.
"Pat had the ham."
Nice job.
Want to try it
one more time?
WOMAN:
In order to be able to read
we have to understand
what the correspondence is
between the sounds
that make up words
and the visual information
that we provide in letters.
And so what happens is...
For example,
compared to language,
which children acquire
quite naturally,
reading has to be
explicitly taught.
All right. Are you ready?
Quick as you can.
CLASS:
Mmm.
How about this one?
( class making short "A" sound )
Ah-ah-ah-ah-ah.
TEACHER:
Oh, my, you've got it.
WOLF:
Reading is many different kinds
of behaviors--
it's letter naming...
( making growling "R" sound )
WOLF:
It's letter perception.
We got to make sure
we know which letter it is.
The stick is first.
( kids sounding letter "B" )
Ship...
Slip...
WOLF:
It's word perception...
Spin.
It's recognizing words,
it's comprehension.
( reading quietly )
And all those behaviors
will utilize different parts
of the brain
whether we're talking
about a single letter
or whether we're talking about
reading a passage of Proust.
"The pan is hot.
Put the..."
NARRATOR:
To read, the brain must cobble
together a variety of parts
that evolved for other purposes.
Vision, hearing, judgment,
memory all come into play
in a rapid-fire,
overlapping process
that scientists are only
just beginning to understand.
EDEN:
We are looking at a...
a very, um, unusual skill
that we have learned
and the question is, "When
we learn a skill like that,
"where do we place it
in the brain?
"What part of the brain
becomes available
to do this very specific skill?"
NARRATOR:
For a child just learning
to read, even a single letter
will set off a complex series
of reactions.
The brain begins
by focusing its attention
on the reading task itself.
Then it captures a visual
representation of the letter
and sends it to the areas
of the brain
where the visual symbol
gets hooked up
to the letter's sound
and meaning.
Trap...
Trap.
NARRATOR:
Finally the letter
is articulated.
"Sand... Skid..."
WOLF:
It's incredible.
"Flat... Plan..."
We've got about
17 different regions
that are all involved
in reading.
One of them can easily go awry.
Why don't we start here?
What's this word?
"Shoulder... Isla...
"Island... Correctly.
"Scientifics...
Banquet."
Hmm, "Doubtful..."
Is it okay if I skip that word?
Can you give it
a try?
Okay.
Just give it
your best shot.
"Munchane... Mousechance."
All right.
Here we go,
buddy.
How about these?
BOY:
I have this, um, this thing
in my brain
that's called "dyslexia."
I don't know the first one.
"Hesitating."
It means something... I don't
know, happening in my brain.
I don't really know much
about it, so my dad does.
We'd always, um,
been, um, impressed
with how intelligent
Russell really is
and, um, he has
incredible creativity,
he has a strong vocabulary,
he's very interested
in the outside world,
he can put concepts together,
he's very logical and he's,
in fact, a very bright boy.
RUSSELL:
"Masculine."
TEACHER:
What's that one?
"Mascu...
Masculine."
NARRATOR:
The ability to learn to read
is a gift that not all children
receive equally.
"Sevencent."
Millions like eight-year-old
Russell Train are dyslexic--
unable to translate
the squiggles on the page
into sound and meaning.
TEACHER:
Say it one
more time.
"Therpekit."
Let's move on
to these.
I know they're hard.
INTERVIEWER:
When you were little
and you started
going to school
learning how to read,
how was that going
for you?
Hmm, okay, because they were
mostly like words this big.
And how about as
you got older
and started to try
to learn
and do other things?
What was that like?
Oh, it was getting
a little harder for me
because the words
were getting bigger
and the reading was getting
a little more complicated
and stuff.
There is some family history
of, uh, of this.
Very bright people,
but trouble learning to read.
I repeated third grade,
my middle sister
repeated kindergarten
and we were just told
that we had to repeat
and go to after-school
study hall.
"O... A... S... D... P..."
MARJORY HARDY TRAIN:
You were just a slow learner.
"S... D... P... S... D... A..."
WOLF:
Dyslexia is the inability
to learn to process
written language
despite adequate intelligence,
adequate sensory,
adequate exposure.
You have adequate everything
and yet your system
has been differently wired.
NARRATOR:
What is happening in the brain
of a dyslexic child
that makes reading so difficult?
At Georgetown University
Hospital in Washington, D.C.,
neuroscientist Guinevere Eden
is scanning the brains
of dyslexic children
to see how they are different
from children
who read without problems.
MAN:
Russell, can you
hear me okay?
Yeah.
Is it loud
enough?
Yeah.
Thank you.
EDEN:
We're still trying
to grapple, really,
with what is the mechanism
for dyslexia?
How does the brain
of a dyslexic differ?
Brain imaging studies have shown
that there are some areas
that we see are active
in individuals who are good
readers during a reading task
that we don't see in individuals
who have dyslexia.
( machine beeping )
RUSSELL:
"Dish...
Lamp."
NARRATOR:
One part of Eden's study
examines the brains
of dyslexic children as they try
to remove the first sound
from words flashed on a screen.
RUSSELL:
Ail.
( machine beeping )
NARRATOR:
Scientists have demonstrated
that the brains
of some dyslexic children
are not active in areas
responsible for dissecting words
into their constituent sounds.
EDEN:
Children who have dyslexia
really never understand
the concept
that one word may be made up
of several sounds.
For example, in the word "cat,"
the sounds are "ca," "ah," "t"
and we just blend
them all together
and when we grow up speaking,
we just say them as one sound
and that's all we need to do
to convey the meaning.
But now when we have to map
that sound onto print,
we have to understand that there
are actually three sounds
that make up the word "cat."
( Russell sounding out "dome" )
( machine beeping )
WOLF:
That fundamental ability
to take the speech stream
and get it into its tiny sound
parts is pivotal in reading.
Otherwise the teacher
is out there saying, "B-at"
and the child has no idea
what she's doing.
I know you've used
the tiles before,
so I'm going to show you
some letters
and I want you to tell me
the sounds of these letters.
...T-I-O-N.
Conception.
NARRATOR:
Dyslexic children learn,
but they learn differently.
The Lindamood-Bell program
offers several strategies
to help them.
( actively conversing )
WOMAN:
Okay, so what we're
going to do, Russell,
is some coloring coding
with the blocks.
I'm going to give
you a word
and you just put out
the block
for each sound
that you feel.
The first word
is "flip."
( sounding )
Good job.
So what word do we have
all together again?
"Flip."
MAN:
What we're prescribing
for Russell's treatment
is a procedure where we
slow down the articulation
of how we say words.
He needs to be hypersensitized
to the ability to take those
sounds and pull them apart
but... but equally important
is then put them back together
which is what we do
when we read.
Can you tell me
the labels
for the sounds,
what you feel
your mouth doing?
( sounding "flip" )
And when you make
the "P" sound,
is your tongue
tapping
or are your
lips popping?
Um, popping.
Right,
so we call that a...
Lip-popper.
Yeah, lip-popper.
WORTHINGTON:
We stimulate their ability
to give conscious attention
to what they feel when they
produce a particular sound.
Um, a smile sound.
Yeah, why do we call it
a smile sound?
Because when you say it,
it makes your mouth smile.
We know and we can see
that you're getting
behavioral changes.
In other words, we can
teach children to read better.
What we don't understand are
what are the mechanisms
in the brain
that on a neurophysiological
level change
as a result of that process?
( machine humming )
NARRATOR:
After six weeks
at Lindamood-Bell,
Russell's reading has improved
and Guinevere Eden wants to know
how his brain has changed.
( machine beeping )
RUSSELL:
Oh.
( machine beeping )
NARRATOR:
Based on previous studies
with dyslexic adults
who improved their
reading skills,
Eden speculates
that Russell now uses
more areas of his brain
to read than normal readers--
possibly even parts
of his right hemisphere.
( machine beeping )
EDEN:
The thing
will be more meaningful
when we have several children
who have done the same thing.
That gives us a...
a much better view
on, you know, what's
really going on
rather than just
saying something
about one child
or two children.
Right, right.
NARRATOR:
It will be several years
before Eden completes her study,
but while she
and other scientists wait
to understand how,
dyslexic children continue
to remodel their own brains.
WOLF:
Childhood can be one of the most
wonderful periods of all of life
because we have everything
to discover.
The child is father of the man,
mother of the woman.
I think the brain must be having
a great time as a child
because it's all plastic.
And if there's any one word
for development and learning
it's "plasticity."
And plasticity,
I believe, can be lifelong.
[music] If I decide... [music]
Next time on
The Secret Life of the Brain...
[music] Promise I won't
do you wrong. [music]
The teenage brain.
Vulnerable to the dangers
of drugs.
I'm an addict.
And I need, I need help.
And the chaos of schizophrenia.
MAN:
I spent 19 years
with the same personality
and, all of a sudden,
it was taken away.
Next time, the teenage brain.
Take a 3-D animated tour
of the brain
at PBS Online.
Find brainteasers,
take a cognitive test and more
at pbs.org.